docs/lonala/lona.core.md, before:

# lona.core

Core language intrinsics. These are native functions implemented in the VM.

---

## Namespace and Vars

### `*ns*`

Process-local var holding current namespace. Each process has its own `*ns*` value,
inherited from the parent at spawn time.

```clojure
*ns*  ; → current namespace

;; Change namespace for current process
(def *ns* (find-ns 'my.namespace))
```

### `create-ns`

Create a namespace.

```clojure
(create-ns sym)  ; → namespace
```

### `find-ns`

Find namespace by symbol.

```clojure
(find-ns sym)  ; → namespace or nil
```

### `ns-name`

Get namespace's symbol name.

```clojure
(ns-name ns)  ; → symbol
```

### `ns-map`

Get namespace's var bindings.

```clojure
(ns-map ns)  ; → map of symbol → var
```

### `intern`

Intern a var in namespace.

```clojure
(intern ns sym)        ; → var
(intern ns sym val)    ; → var (with initial value)
```

### `refer`

Add var references from another namespace.

```clojure
(refer ns)  ; → nil
```

### `alias`

Create namespace alias.

```clojure
(alias alias-sym ns-sym)  ; → nil
```

### `var`

Get var object.

```clojure
(var sym)   ; → var
#'sym       ; reader syntax
```

### `var-get`

Get value of var.

```clojure
(var-get v)  ; → value
```

### `meta`

Get metadata of object.

```clojure
(meta obj)  ; → map or nil
```

### `with-meta`

Return object with new metadata.

```clojure
(with-meta obj meta-map)  ; → obj with metadata
```

---

## Evaluation

### `eval`

Evaluate form.

```clojure
(eval form)  ; → result
```

### `read-string`

Parse string to form.

```clojure
(read-string s)  ; → form
```

### `macroexpand`

Fully expand macros in form.

```clojure
(macroexpand form)  ; → expanded form
```

### `macroexpand-1`

Expand macros once.

```clojure
(macroexpand-1 form)  ; → expanded form
```

### `gensym`

Generate unique symbol.

```clojure
(gensym)         ; → symbol
(gensym prefix)  ; → symbol with prefix
```

### `load-file`

Load and evaluate file.

```clojure
(load-file path)  ; → last value
```

---

## Arithmetic

### `+`

Addition.

```clojure
(+ a b ...)  ; → sum
```

### `-`

Subtraction.

```clojure
(- a)        ; → negation
(- a b ...)  ; → difference
```

### `*`

Multiplication.

```clojure
(* a b ...)  ; → product
```

### `/`

Division.

```clojure
(/ a b ...)  ; → quotient
```

### `mod`

Modulus (sign follows divisor).

```clojure
(mod a b)  ; → remainder
```

### `quot`

Integer quotient (truncates toward zero).

```clojure
(quot a b)  ; → integer
```

### `rem`

Remainder (sign follows dividend).

```clojure
(rem a b)  ; → remainder
```

### `checked-add`

Addition with overflow check.

```clojure
(checked-add a b)  ; → [:ok result] or [:error :overflow]
```

### `saturating-add`

Addition clamped to type bounds.

```clojure
(saturating-add a b)  ; → result (clamped)
```

---

## Ratio

### `numerator`

Get numerator of ratio.

```clojure
(numerator r)  ; → integer
```

### `denominator`

Get denominator of ratio.

```clojure
(denominator r)  ; → integer
```

---

## Comparison

### `=`

Equality (value-based).

```clojure
(= a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `<`

Less than.

```clojure
(< a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `>`

Greater than.

```clojure
(> a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `<=`

Less than or equal.

```clojure
(<= a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `>=`

Greater than or equal.

```clojure
(>= a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `not=`

Not equal.

```clojure
(not= a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `identical?`

Reference identity.

```clojure
(identical? a b)  ; → boolean
```

---

## Boolean

### `not`

Logical negation.

```clojure
(not x)  ; → boolean
```

---

## Collections

### `prepend`

Add element to front of list.

```clojure
(prepend list elem)  ; → list
```

### `append`

Add element to end of vector or tuple.

```clojure
(append coll elem)  ; → coll
```

### `put`

Associate key-value in map.

```clojure
(put map key val)  ; → map
```

### `set-add`

Add element to set.

```clojure
(set-add set elem)  ; → set
```

### `dissoc`

Remove key from map.

```clojure
(dissoc map key)  ; → map
```

### `set-remove`

Remove element from set.

```clojure
(set-remove set elem)  ; → set
```

### `count`

Number of elements.

```clojure
(count coll)  ; → integer
```

### `nth`

Get element by index.

```clojure
(nth coll idx)            ; → element (or error)
(nth coll idx not-found)  ; → element or not-found
```

### `get`

Get value by key.

```clojure
(get coll key)            ; → value or nil
(get coll key not-found)  ; → value or not-found
```

### `keys`

Get map keys.

```clojure
(keys map)  ; → list of keys
```

### `vals`

Get map values.

```clojure
(vals map)  ; → list of values
```

---

## Sequences

These intrinsics are **polymorphic** — they work on any collection type (list, tuple,
vector, map, set). This enables generic functions like `map` and `filter` to be derived
once and work on all collections.

### `first`

First element of any collection.

```clojure
(first coll)  ; → element or nil

(first '(1 2 3))      ; → 1
(first [1 2 3])       ; → 1 (tuple)
(first {1 2 3})       ; → 1 (vector)
(first %{:a 1 :b 2})  ; → [:a 1] (key-value tuple)
(first #{3 1 2})      ; → <some element> (order unspecified)
(first nil)           ; → nil
(first '())           ; → nil
```

### `rest`

Remaining elements after first. **Always returns a list**, regardless of input type.

```clojure
(rest coll)  ; → list (empty list if coll has 0-1 elements)

(rest '(1 2 3))      ; → (2 3)
(rest [1 2 3])       ; → (2 3) - list, not tuple
(rest {1 2 3})       ; → (2 3) - list, not vector
(rest %{:a 1 :b 2})  ; → ([:b 2]) - list of tuples
(rest '(1))          ; → ()
(rest nil)           ; → ()
```

### `empty?`

True if collection has no elements.

```clojure
(empty? coll)  ; → boolean

(empty? '())   ; → true
(empty? nil)   ; → true
(empty? [])    ; → true
(empty? '(1))  ; → false
```

---

## Type Predicates

```clojure
(nil? x)          ; → boolean
(boolean? x)      ; → boolean
(true? x)         ; → boolean
(false? x)        ; → boolean
(number? x)       ; → boolean
(integer? x)      ; → boolean
(float? x)        ; → boolean
(ratio? x)        ; → boolean
(string? x)       ; → boolean
(char? x)         ; → boolean
(symbol? x)       ; → boolean
(keyword? x)      ; → boolean
(fn? x)           ; → boolean
(var? x)          ; → boolean
(list? x)         ; → boolean
(tuple? x)        ; → boolean
(vector? x)       ; → boolean
(map? x)          ; → boolean
(set? x)          ; → boolean
(binary? x)       ; → boolean
(bytebuf? x)      ; → boolean
(paddr? x)        ; → boolean
(vaddr? x)        ; → boolean
(realm-id? x)     ; → boolean
(pid? x)          ; → boolean
(ref? x)          ; → boolean
(cap? x)          ; → boolean
(msg-info? x)     ; → boolean
(notification? x) ; → boolean
(region? x)       ; → boolean
(dma-buffer? x)   ; → boolean
(ring? x)         ; → boolean
```

### `type`

Get type keyword.

```clojure
(type x)  ; → :nil :boolean :integer :string :list :tuple :map ...
```

---

## Type Coercion

Fixed-width integer conversion:

```clojure
(u8 x)   ; → u8
(u16 x)  ; → u16
(u32 x)  ; → u32
(u64 x)  ; → u64
(i8 x)   ; → i8
(i16 x)  ; → i16
(i32 x)  ; → i32
(i64 x)  ; → i64
```

Character conversion:

```clojure
(char x)  ; → character (from integer code point)
```

---

## Strings

### `str`

Concatenate to string.

```clojure
(str a b ...)  ; → string
```

### `subs`

Substring.

```clojure
(subs s start)      ; → substring from start
(subs s start end)  ; → substring from start to end
```

### `symbol`

Create symbol.

```clojure
(symbol name)       ; → symbol
(symbol ns name)    ; → qualified symbol
```

### `keyword`

Create keyword.

```clojure
(keyword name)      ; → keyword
(keyword ns name)   ; → qualified keyword
```

### `name`

Get name part of symbol/keyword.

```clojure
(name sym-or-kw)  ; → string
```

### `namespace`

Get namespace part of symbol/keyword.

```clojure
(namespace sym-or-kw)  ; → string or nil
```

---

## Error Handling

Lonala follows the "let it crash" philosophy from Erlang/OTP:

**Use tuple returns** for expected, recoverable errors:
```clojure
[:ok result]      ; Success
[:error reason]   ; Expected failure (invalid input, not found, etc.)
```

**Use `exit`** for unrecoverable errors (see `lona.process/exit`):
```clojure
(exit :normal)                        ; Clean exit (doesn't cascade)
(exit :shutdown)                      ; Clean shutdown
(exit [:error :invariant-violated])   ; Error with reason
```

Crashed processes are restarted by supervisors. Don't catch crashes — let them propagate.

### `make-ref`

Create unique reference (for request/response correlation).

```clojure
(make-ref)  ; → ref
```

---

## Function Application

### `apply`

Apply function to args.

```clojure
(apply f args)           ; → result
(apply f a b ... args)   ; → result
```

---

## Bitwise Operations

### Basic

```clojure
(bit-and a b ...)   ; Bitwise AND
(bit-or a b ...)    ; Bitwise OR
(bit-xor a b ...)   ; Bitwise XOR
(bit-not a)         ; Bitwise NOT
```

### Shifts

```clojure
(bit-shl a n)   ; Shift left
(bit-shr a n)   ; Logical shift right (zero-fill)
(bit-sar a n)   ; Arithmetic shift right (sign-extend)
```

### Rotations

```clojure
(bit-rol a n width)   ; Rotate left
(bit-ror a n width)   ; Rotate right
```

### Single-Bit

```clojure
(bit-test a n)    ; Test if bit n is set
(bit-set a n)     ; Set bit n
(bit-clear a n)   ; Clear bit n
(bit-flip a n)    ; Toggle bit n
```

### Bit Fields

```clojure
(bit-field a start len)           ; Extract bits [start, start+len)
(bit-field-set a start len val)   ; Insert val into bit field
```

### Bit Counting

```clojure
(bit-count a)        ; Population count (number of 1 bits)
(leading-zeros a)    ; Count leading zeros
(trailing-zeros a)   ; Count trailing zeros
(leading-ones a)     ; Count leading ones
(trailing-ones a)    ; Count trailing ones
```

### Byte Order

```clojure
(byte-reverse16 a)   ; Reverse bytes in u16
(byte-reverse32 a)   ; Reverse bytes in u32
(byte-reverse64 a)   ; Reverse bytes in u64
```

### Masks

```clojure
(mask-bits n)           ; Mask with n low bits set
(mask-range start end)  ; Mask for bits [start, end)
```

---

## Binary

### `binary`

Create binary from byte sequence.

```clojure
(binary bytes)  ; → binary
```

### `binary-size`

Size in bytes.

```clojure
(binary-size bin)  ; → u64
```

### `binary-ref`

Get byte at offset.

```clojure
(binary-ref bin offset)  ; → u8
```

### `binary-slice`

Extract slice.

```clojure
(binary-slice bin start len)  ; → binary
```

### `binary-concat`

Concatenate binaries.

```clojure
(binary-concat bin1 bin2)  ; → binary
```

### `binary->string`

Decode to string.

```clojure
(binary->string bin)            ; → string (UTF-8)
(binary->string bin encoding)   ; → string
```

Encodings: `:utf-8` (default), `:ascii`, `:latin1`

### `string->binary`

Encode string.

```clojure
(string->binary s)            ; → binary (UTF-8)
(string->binary s encoding)   ; → binary
```

Encodings: `:utf-8` (default), `:ascii`, `:latin1`

---

## Bytebuf

### `bytebuf-alloc`

Allocate zeroed buffer.

```clojure
(bytebuf-alloc size)  ; → bytebuf
```

### `bytebuf-alloc-unsafe`

Allocate uninitialized buffer.

```clojure
(bytebuf-alloc-unsafe size)  ; → bytebuf
```

### `bytebuf-size`

Buffer size.

```clojure
(bytebuf-size buf)  ; → u64
```

### `bytebuf->binary`

Convert to immutable binary.

```clojure
(bytebuf->binary buf)                 ; → binary
(bytebuf->binary buf offset len)      ; → binary (slice)
```

### Read Operations

Native endianness:

```clojure
(bytebuf-read8 buf offset)    ; → u8
(bytebuf-read16 buf offset)   ; → u16
(bytebuf-read32 buf offset)   ; → u32
(bytebuf-read64 buf offset)   ; → u64
```

Little-endian:

```clojure
(bytebuf-read16-le buf offset)   ; → u16
(bytebuf-read32-le buf offset)   ; → u32
(bytebuf-read64-le buf offset)   ; → u64
```

Big-endian:

```clojure
(bytebuf-read16-be buf offset)   ; → u16
(bytebuf-read32-be buf offset)   ; → u32
(bytebuf-read64-be buf offset)   ; → u64
```

Signed:

```clojure
(bytebuf-read-i8 buf offset)       ; → i8
(bytebuf-read-i16-le buf offset)   ; → i16
(bytebuf-read-i16-be buf offset)   ; → i16
(bytebuf-read-i32-le buf offset)   ; → i32
(bytebuf-read-i32-be buf offset)   ; → i32
(bytebuf-read-i64-le buf offset)   ; → i64
(bytebuf-read-i64-be buf offset)   ; → i64
```

### Write Operations

Native endianness:

```clojure
(bytebuf-write8! buf offset val)    ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write16! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write32! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write64! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
```

Little-endian:

```clojure
(bytebuf-write16-le! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write32-le! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write64-le! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
```

Big-endian:

```clojure
(bytebuf-write16-be! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write32-be! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write64-be! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
```

### Bulk Operations

```clojure
(bytebuf-copy! dst dst-off src src-off len)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-fill! buf offset len val)            ; → :ok
```

---

## Endianness

```clojure
(native-endian)        ; → :little or :big

(native->be16 val)     ; Convert native to big-endian
(native->be32 val)
(native->be64 val)
(native->le16 val)     ; Convert native to little-endian
(native->le32 val)
(native->le64 val)
(be->native16 val)     ; Convert big-endian to native
(be->native32 val)
(be->native64 val)
(le->native16 val)     ; Convert little-endian to native
(le->native32 val)
(le->native64 val)
```

---

## Addresses

### Physical Address

```clojure
(paddr val)                      ; Create paddr from u64
(paddr+ addr offset)             ; Add offset → paddr
(paddr- addr1 addr2)             ; Difference → u64
(paddr->u64 addr)                ; Extract as u64
(paddr-align addr alignment)     ; Round up
(paddr-align-down addr alignment); Round down
(paddr-aligned? addr alignment)  ; Check alignment
(paddr= addr1 addr2)             ; Equality
(paddr< addr1 addr2)             ; Less than
```

### Virtual Address

```clojure
(vaddr val)                      ; Create vaddr from u64
(vaddr+ addr offset)             ; Add offset → vaddr
(vaddr- addr1 addr2)             ; Difference → u64
(vaddr->u64 addr)                ; Extract as u64
(vaddr-align addr alignment)     ; Round up
(vaddr-align-down addr alignment); Round down
(vaddr-aligned? addr alignment)  ; Check alignment
(vaddr= addr1 addr2)             ; Equality
(vaddr< addr1 addr2)             ; Less than
```

---

## PID

```clojure
(pid realm-id local-id)   ; Create PID
(pid-realm p)             ; Get realm ID
(pid-local p)             ; Get local ID
(pid= p1 p2)              ; Equality
```

---

## Capabilities

### Type Predicates

```clojure
(tcb-cap? x)
(endpoint-cap? x)
(notification-cap? x)
(cnode-cap? x)
(untyped-cap? x)
(frame-cap? x)
(vspace-cap? x)
(sched-context-cap? x)
(irq-handler-cap? x)
(port-cap? x)
```

### Inspection

```clojure
(cap-type cap)              ; → :tcb :endpoint :frame ...
(cap-rights cap)            ; → #{:read :write :grant ...}
(cap-has-right? cap right)  ; → boolean
```

---

## Message Info

```clojure
(msg-info label length caps)   ; Create msg-info
(msg-info-label mi)            ; Get label
(msg-info-length mi)           ; Get length
(msg-info-caps mi)             ; Get caps count
```

---

## Appendix: Expected Derived Functions

The following are **not intrinsics** and should be implemented in Lonala:

**Core Macros:**
- `if` — conditional (expands to `match`)
- `let` — local bindings (expands to nested `match`)
- `letfn` — mutually recursive local functions
- `fn` — multi-arity functions (expands to `fn*` + `match`)
- `defn` — named function definition
- `when`, `when-not` — single-branch conditional
- `cond` — multi-branch conditional
- `case` — value-based dispatch
- `->`, `->>` — threading macros
- `and`, `or` — short-circuit boolean
- `ns`, `in-ns` — namespace declaration

**Sequences:**
- `second`, `last`, `butlast`
- `map`, `filter`, `reduce`, `take`, `drop`
- `range`, `repeat`, `iterate`
- `concat`, `flatten`

**Collections:**
- `list`, `tuple`, `vector`, `hash-map`, `hash-set` — constructors from elements
- `vals`, `into`, `merge`
- `conj` (polymorphic add)
- `update`, `update-in`, `get-in`, `assoc-in`
- `contains?`

**Predicates:**
- `seq?`, `coll?`, `seqable?`
- `pos?`, `neg?`, `zero?`, `even?`, `odd?`

**Other:**
- `identity`, `constantly`, `comp`, `partial`
- `juxt`, `some`, `every?`
- `format`, `println`

Commit message:

feat(vm): add vars and namespace bindings
Implement Clojure-style vars as the binding mechanism between symbols
and values within namespaces. Uses MVCC (Multi-Version Concurrency
Control) for atomic root value updates, ensuring readers always see
consistent state.

Vars are stored as VarSlot (stable address) pointing to VarContent
(immutable binding data). Updates create new VarContent and atomically
swap the pointer, enabling lock-free reads from any process.

Adds symbol interning to enable O(1) equality comparison via address
comparison, required for efficient namespace lookups.

New intrinsics: var?, intern, var-get
Reader syntax: #'sym expands to (var sym)
Special form: (var sym) returns the var object for qualified symbols

docs/lonala/lona.core.md, after:

# lona.core

Core language intrinsics. These are native functions implemented in the VM.

---

## Namespace and Vars

### `*ns*`

Process-local var holding current namespace. Each process has its own `*ns*` value,
inherited from the parent at spawn time.

```clojure
*ns*  ; → current namespace

;; Change namespace for current process
(def *ns* (find-ns 'my.namespace))
```

### `create-ns`

Create a namespace.

```clojure
(create-ns sym)  ; → namespace
```

### `find-ns`

Find namespace by symbol.

```clojure
(find-ns sym)  ; → namespace or nil
```

### `ns-name`

Get namespace's symbol name.

```clojure
(ns-name ns)  ; → symbol
```

### `ns-map`

Get namespace's var bindings.

```clojure
(ns-map ns)  ; → map of symbol → var
```

### `intern`

Intern a var in namespace.

```clojure
(intern ns sym)        ; → var
(intern ns sym val)    ; → var (with initial value)
```

### `refer`

Add var references from another namespace.

```clojure
(refer ns)  ; → nil
```

### `alias`

Create namespace alias.

```clojure
(alias alias-sym ns-sym)  ; → nil
```

### `var`

Get var object by name. The `var` special form looks up a var by symbol name
and returns the var object (not its value).

```clojure
(var sym)   ; returns var object for sym
#'sym       ; reader syntax, equivalent to (var sym)
#'ns/sym    ; qualified var lookup
```

Note: `var` is a special form - the symbol argument is not evaluated.

### `var-get`

Get value of var.

```clojure
(var-get v)  ; → value
```

### `meta`

Get metadata of object.

```clojure
(meta obj)  ; → map or nil
```

### `with-meta`

Return object with new metadata.

```clojure
(with-meta obj meta-map)  ; → obj with metadata
```

---

## Evaluation

### `eval`

Evaluate form.

```clojure
(eval form)  ; → result
```

### `read-string`

Parse string to form.

```clojure
(read-string s)  ; → form
```

### `macroexpand`

Fully expand macros in form.

```clojure
(macroexpand form)  ; → expanded form
```

### `macroexpand-1`

Expand macros once.

```clojure
(macroexpand-1 form)  ; → expanded form
```

### `gensym`

Generate unique symbol.

```clojure
(gensym)         ; → symbol
(gensym prefix)  ; → symbol with prefix
```

### `load-file`

Load and evaluate file.

```clojure
(load-file path)  ; → last value
```

---

## Arithmetic

### `+`

Addition.

```clojure
(+ a b ...)  ; → sum
```

### `-`

Subtraction.

```clojure
(- a)        ; → negation
(- a b ...)  ; → difference
```

### `*`

Multiplication.

```clojure
(* a b ...)  ; → product
```

### `/`

Division.

```clojure
(/ a b ...)  ; → quotient
```

### `mod`

Modulus (sign follows divisor).

```clojure
(mod a b)  ; → remainder
```

### `quot`

Integer quotient (truncates toward zero).

```clojure
(quot a b)  ; → integer
```

### `rem`

Remainder (sign follows dividend).

```clojure
(rem a b)  ; → remainder
```

### `checked-add`

Addition with overflow check.

```clojure
(checked-add a b)  ; → [:ok result] or [:error :overflow]
```

### `saturating-add`

Addition clamped to type bounds.

```clojure
(saturating-add a b)  ; → result (clamped)
```

---

## Ratio

### `numerator`

Get numerator of ratio.

```clojure
(numerator r)  ; → integer
```

### `denominator`

Get denominator of ratio.

```clojure
(denominator r)  ; → integer
```

---

## Comparison

### `=`

Equality (value-based).

```clojure
(= a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `<`

Less than.

```clojure
(< a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `>`

Greater than.

```clojure
(> a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `<=`

Less than or equal.

```clojure
(<= a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `>=`

Greater than or equal.

```clojure
(>= a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `not=`

Not equal.

```clojure
(not= a b ...)  ; → boolean
```

### `identical?`

Reference identity.

```clojure
(identical? a b)  ; → boolean
```

---

## Boolean

### `not`

Logical negation.

```clojure
(not x)  ; → boolean
```

---

## Collections

### `prepend`

Add element to front of list.

```clojure
(prepend list elem)  ; → list
```

### `append`

Add element to end of vector or tuple.

```clojure
(append coll elem)  ; → coll
```

### `put`

Associate key-value in map.

```clojure
(put map key val)  ; → map
```

### `set-add`

Add element to set.

```clojure
(set-add set elem)  ; → set
```

### `dissoc`

Remove key from map.

```clojure
(dissoc map key)  ; → map
```

### `set-remove`

Remove element from set.

```clojure
(set-remove set elem)  ; → set
```

### `count`

Number of elements.

```clojure
(count coll)  ; → integer
```

### `nth`

Get element by index.

```clojure
(nth coll idx)            ; → element (or error)
(nth coll idx not-found)  ; → element or not-found
```

### `get`

Get value by key.

```clojure
(get coll key)            ; → value or nil
(get coll key not-found)  ; → value or not-found
```

### `keys`

Get map keys.

```clojure
(keys map)  ; → list of keys
```

### `vals`

Get map values.

```clojure
(vals map)  ; → list of values
```

---

## Sequences

These intrinsics are **polymorphic** — they work on any collection type (list, tuple,
vector, map, set). This enables generic functions like `map` and `filter` to be derived
once and work on all collections.

### `first`

First element of any collection.

```clojure
(first coll)  ; → element or nil

(first '(1 2 3))      ; → 1
(first [1 2 3])       ; → 1 (tuple)
(first {1 2 3})       ; → 1 (vector)
(first %{:a 1 :b 2})  ; → [:a 1] (key-value tuple)
(first #{3 1 2})      ; → <some element> (order unspecified)
(first nil)           ; → nil
(first '())           ; → nil
```

### `rest`

Remaining elements after first. **Always returns a list**, regardless of input type.

```clojure
(rest coll)  ; → list (empty list if coll has 0-1 elements)

(rest '(1 2 3))      ; → (2 3)
(rest [1 2 3])       ; → (2 3) - list, not tuple
(rest {1 2 3})       ; → (2 3) - list, not vector
(rest %{:a 1 :b 2})  ; → ([:b 2]) - list of tuples
(rest '(1))          ; → ()
(rest nil)           ; → ()
```

### `empty?`

True if collection has no elements.

```clojure
(empty? coll)  ; → boolean

(empty? '())   ; → true
(empty? nil)   ; → true
(empty? [])    ; → true
(empty? '(1))  ; → false
```

---

## Type Predicates

```clojure
(nil? x)          ; → boolean
(boolean? x)      ; → boolean
(true? x)         ; → boolean
(false? x)        ; → boolean
(number? x)       ; → boolean
(integer? x)      ; → boolean
(float? x)        ; → boolean
(ratio? x)        ; → boolean
(string? x)       ; → boolean
(char? x)         ; → boolean
(symbol? x)       ; → boolean
(keyword? x)      ; → boolean
(fn? x)           ; → boolean
(var? x)          ; → boolean
(list? x)         ; → boolean
(tuple? x)        ; → boolean
(vector? x)       ; → boolean
(map? x)          ; → boolean
(set? x)          ; → boolean
(binary? x)       ; → boolean
(bytebuf? x)      ; → boolean
(paddr? x)        ; → boolean
(vaddr? x)        ; → boolean
(realm-id? x)     ; → boolean
(pid? x)          ; → boolean
(ref? x)          ; → boolean
(cap? x)          ; → boolean
(msg-info? x)     ; → boolean
(notification? x) ; → boolean
(region? x)       ; → boolean
(dma-buffer? x)   ; → boolean
(ring? x)         ; → boolean
```

### `type`

Get type keyword.

```clojure
(type x)  ; → :nil :boolean :integer :string :list :tuple :map ...
```

---

## Type Coercion

Fixed-width integer conversion:

```clojure
(u8 x)   ; → u8
(u16 x)  ; → u16
(u32 x)  ; → u32
(u64 x)  ; → u64
(i8 x)   ; → i8
(i16 x)  ; → i16
(i32 x)  ; → i32
(i64 x)  ; → i64
```

Character conversion:

```clojure
(char x)  ; → character (from integer code point)
```

---

## Strings

### `str`

Concatenate to string.

```clojure
(str a b ...)  ; → string
```

### `subs`

Substring.

```clojure
(subs s start)      ; → substring from start
(subs s start end)  ; → substring from start to end
```

### `symbol`

Create symbol.

```clojure
(symbol name)       ; → symbol
(symbol ns name)    ; → qualified symbol
```

### `keyword`

Create keyword.

```clojure
(keyword name)      ; → keyword
(keyword ns name)   ; → qualified keyword
```

### `name`

Get name part of symbol/keyword.

```clojure
(name sym-or-kw)  ; → string
```

### `namespace`

Get namespace part of symbol/keyword.

```clojure
(namespace sym-or-kw)  ; → string or nil
```

---

## Error Handling

Lonala follows the "let it crash" philosophy from Erlang/OTP:

**Use tuple returns** for expected, recoverable errors:
```clojure
[:ok result]      ; Success
[:error reason]   ; Expected failure (invalid input, not found, etc.)
```

**Use `exit`** for unrecoverable errors (see `lona.process/exit`):
```clojure
(exit :normal)                        ; Clean exit (doesn't cascade)
(exit :shutdown)                      ; Clean shutdown
(exit [:error :invariant-violated])   ; Error with reason
```

Crashed processes are restarted by supervisors. Don't catch crashes — let them propagate.

### `make-ref`

Create unique reference (for request/response correlation).

```clojure
(make-ref)  ; → ref
```

---

## Function Application

### `apply`

Apply function to args.

```clojure
(apply f args)           ; → result
(apply f a b ... args)   ; → result
```

---

## Bitwise Operations

### Basic

```clojure
(bit-and a b ...)   ; Bitwise AND
(bit-or a b ...)    ; Bitwise OR
(bit-xor a b ...)   ; Bitwise XOR
(bit-not a)         ; Bitwise NOT
```

### Shifts

```clojure
(bit-shl a n)   ; Shift left
(bit-shr a n)   ; Logical shift right (zero-fill)
(bit-sar a n)   ; Arithmetic shift right (sign-extend)
```

### Rotations

```clojure
(bit-rol a n width)   ; Rotate left
(bit-ror a n width)   ; Rotate right
```

### Single-Bit

```clojure
(bit-test a n)    ; Test if bit n is set
(bit-set a n)     ; Set bit n
(bit-clear a n)   ; Clear bit n
(bit-flip a n)    ; Toggle bit n
```

### Bit Fields

```clojure
(bit-field a start len)           ; Extract bits [start, start+len)
(bit-field-set a start len val)   ; Insert val into bit field
```

### Bit Counting

```clojure
(bit-count a)        ; Population count (number of 1 bits)
(leading-zeros a)    ; Count leading zeros
(trailing-zeros a)   ; Count trailing zeros
(leading-ones a)     ; Count leading ones
(trailing-ones a)    ; Count trailing ones
```

### Byte Order

```clojure
(byte-reverse16 a)   ; Reverse bytes in u16
(byte-reverse32 a)   ; Reverse bytes in u32
(byte-reverse64 a)   ; Reverse bytes in u64
```

### Masks

```clojure
(mask-bits n)           ; Mask with n low bits set
(mask-range start end)  ; Mask for bits [start, end)
```

---

## Binary

### `binary`

Create binary from byte sequence.

```clojure
(binary bytes)  ; → binary
```

### `binary-size`

Size in bytes.

```clojure
(binary-size bin)  ; → u64
```

### `binary-ref`

Get byte at offset.

```clojure
(binary-ref bin offset)  ; → u8
```

### `binary-slice`

Extract slice.

```clojure
(binary-slice bin start len)  ; → binary
```

### `binary-concat`

Concatenate binaries.

```clojure
(binary-concat bin1 bin2)  ; → binary
```

### `binary->string`

Decode to string.

```clojure
(binary->string bin)            ; → string (UTF-8)
(binary->string bin encoding)   ; → string
```

Encodings: `:utf-8` (default), `:ascii`, `:latin1`

### `string->binary`

Encode string.

```clojure
(string->binary s)            ; → binary (UTF-8)
(string->binary s encoding)   ; → binary
```

Encodings: `:utf-8` (default), `:ascii`, `:latin1`

---

## Bytebuf

### `bytebuf-alloc`

Allocate zeroed buffer.

```clojure
(bytebuf-alloc size)  ; → bytebuf
```

### `bytebuf-alloc-unsafe`

Allocate uninitialized buffer.

```clojure
(bytebuf-alloc-unsafe size)  ; → bytebuf
```

### `bytebuf-size`

Buffer size.

```clojure
(bytebuf-size buf)  ; → u64
```

### `bytebuf->binary`

Convert to immutable binary.

```clojure
(bytebuf->binary buf)                 ; → binary
(bytebuf->binary buf offset len)      ; → binary (slice)
```

### Read Operations

Native endianness:

```clojure
(bytebuf-read8 buf offset)    ; → u8
(bytebuf-read16 buf offset)   ; → u16
(bytebuf-read32 buf offset)   ; → u32
(bytebuf-read64 buf offset)   ; → u64
```

Little-endian:

```clojure
(bytebuf-read16-le buf offset)   ; → u16
(bytebuf-read32-le buf offset)   ; → u32
(bytebuf-read64-le buf offset)   ; → u64
```

Big-endian:

```clojure
(bytebuf-read16-be buf offset)   ; → u16
(bytebuf-read32-be buf offset)   ; → u32
(bytebuf-read64-be buf offset)   ; → u64
```

Signed:

```clojure
(bytebuf-read-i8 buf offset)       ; → i8
(bytebuf-read-i16-le buf offset)   ; → i16
(bytebuf-read-i16-be buf offset)   ; → i16
(bytebuf-read-i32-le buf offset)   ; → i32
(bytebuf-read-i32-be buf offset)   ; → i32
(bytebuf-read-i64-le buf offset)   ; → i64
(bytebuf-read-i64-be buf offset)   ; → i64
```

### Write Operations

Native endianness:

```clojure
(bytebuf-write8! buf offset val)    ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write16! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write32! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write64! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
```

Little-endian:

```clojure
(bytebuf-write16-le! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write32-le! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write64-le! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
```

Big-endian:

```clojure
(bytebuf-write16-be! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write32-be! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-write64-be! buf offset val)   ; → :ok
```

### Bulk Operations

```clojure
(bytebuf-copy! dst dst-off src src-off len)   ; → :ok
(bytebuf-fill! buf offset len val)            ; → :ok
```

---

## Endianness

```clojure
(native-endian)        ; → :little or :big

(native->be16 val)     ; Convert native to big-endian
(native->be32 val)
(native->be64 val)
(native->le16 val)     ; Convert native to little-endian
(native->le32 val)
(native->le64 val)
(be->native16 val)     ; Convert big-endian to native
(be->native32 val)
(be->native64 val)
(le->native16 val)     ; Convert little-endian to native
(le->native32 val)
(le->native64 val)
```

---

## Addresses

### Physical Address

```clojure
(paddr val)                      ; Create paddr from u64
(paddr+ addr offset)             ; Add offset → paddr
(paddr- addr1 addr2)             ; Difference → u64
(paddr->u64 addr)                ; Extract as u64
(paddr-align addr alignment)     ; Round up
(paddr-align-down addr alignment); Round down
(paddr-aligned? addr alignment)  ; Check alignment
(paddr= addr1 addr2)             ; Equality
(paddr< addr1 addr2)             ; Less than
```

### Virtual Address

```clojure
(vaddr val)                      ; Create vaddr from u64
(vaddr+ addr offset)             ; Add offset → vaddr
(vaddr- addr1 addr2)             ; Difference → u64
(vaddr->u64 addr)                ; Extract as u64
(vaddr-align addr alignment)     ; Round up
(vaddr-align-down addr alignment); Round down
(vaddr-aligned? addr alignment)  ; Check alignment
(vaddr= addr1 addr2)             ; Equality
(vaddr< addr1 addr2)             ; Less than
```

---

## PID

```clojure
(pid realm-id local-id)   ; Create PID
(pid-realm p)             ; Get realm ID
(pid-local p)             ; Get local ID
(pid= p1 p2)              ; Equality
```

---

## Capabilities

### Type Predicates

```clojure
(tcb-cap? x)
(endpoint-cap? x)
(notification-cap? x)
(cnode-cap? x)
(untyped-cap? x)
(frame-cap? x)
(vspace-cap? x)
(sched-context-cap? x)
(irq-handler-cap? x)
(port-cap? x)
```

### Inspection

```clojure
(cap-type cap)              ; → :tcb :endpoint :frame ...
(cap-rights cap)            ; → #{:read :write :grant ...}
(cap-has-right? cap right)  ; → boolean
```

---

## Message Info

```clojure
(msg-info label length caps)   ; Create msg-info
(msg-info-label mi)            ; Get label
(msg-info-length mi)           ; Get length
(msg-info-caps mi)             ; Get caps count
```

---

## Appendix: Expected Derived Functions

The following are **not intrinsics** and should be implemented in Lonala:

**Core Macros:**
- `if` — conditional (expands to `match`)
- `let` — local bindings (expands to nested `match`)
- `letfn` — mutually recursive local functions
- `fn` — multi-arity functions (expands to `fn*` + `match`)
- `defn` — named function definition
- `when`, `when-not` — single-branch conditional
- `cond` — multi-branch conditional
- `case` — value-based dispatch
- `->`, `->>` — threading macros
- `and`, `or` — short-circuit boolean
- `ns`, `in-ns` — namespace declaration

**Sequences:**
- `second`, `last`, `butlast`
- `map`, `filter`, `reduce`, `take`, `drop`
- `range`, `repeat`, `iterate`
- `concat`, `flatten`

**Collections:**
- `list`, `tuple`, `vector`, `hash-map`, `hash-set` — constructors from elements
- `vals`, `into`, `merge`
- `conj` (polymorphic add)
- `update`, `update-in`, `get-in`, `assoc-in`
- `contains?`

**Predicates:**
- `seq?`, `coll?`, `seqable?`
- `pos?`, `neg?`, `zero?`, `even?`, `odd?`

**Other:**
- `identity`, `constantly`, `comp`, `partial`
- `juxt`, `some`, `every?`
- `format`, `println`
